✅ Basic Database Concepts
1.What is a database?
A database is an organized collection of structured information or data, typically stored electronically in a computer system and managed by a database management system (DBMS). 
It stores data in tables made up of rows (records) and columns (fields), enabling efficient access, management, modification, and querying of data, often using Structured Query Language (SQL)

2.What is the difference between SQL and NoSQL databases?
The difference between SQL and NoSQL databases centers on their data models, schema flexibility, scalability, and transaction support:

a. Data Model and Structure
    i.SQL databases are relational and store data in tables with rows and columns, enforcing a predefined, fixed schema. 
    This structure supports complex multi-row transactions and relationships between tables.

    ii.NoSQL databases are non-relational and use various data models such as document, key-value, graph, or wide-column stores. 
    They have a dynamic or flexible schema, allowing storage of unstructured or semi-structured data like JSON documents

b. Schema Flexibility
    i.SQL databases require a strict schema defined before data insertion, ensuring data consistency and integrity.

    ii.NoSQL databases allow dynamic schemas, meaning the structure of the data can evolve over time without requiring 
    a predefined schema, which is useful for rapidly changing or diverse data

c. Scalability
    i.SQL databases typically scale vertically by increasing the resources (CPU, RAM) of a single server.

    ii.NoSQL databases scale horizontally by distributing data across multiple servers or nodes, 
    which is more cost-effective and suitable for handling large volumes of fast-changing data

d. Transactions and Consistency
    i.SQL databases support ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) transactions, ensuring reliable multi-step operations 
    across multiple tables.

    ii.NoSQL databases often sacrifice some ACID properties for performance and scalability, following the CAP theorem 
    (Consistency, Availability, Partition tolerance). They usually support atomic operations at the document or single-record level but lack full multi-document transaction support or require manual handling

e. Use Cases
    i.SQL is preferred for applications requiring complex queries, multi-row transactions, and strong consistency, such as banking, accounting, and legacy systems.

    ii.NoSQL fits applications with large-scale, unstructured, or rapidly evolving data needs, like IoT, social networks, user analytics, and real-time personalization

3. What are tables, rows, and columns in a relational database?
    a.Tables are collections of related data organized in a grid of rows and columns, similar to a spreadsheet. 
    Each table typically represents an entity or object type, such as customers, orders, or products

    b.Rows (also called records or tuples) are individual entries in a table. Each row contains a set of values, one for each column, 
    representing a single instance of the entity. For example, a row in a "Customers" table might represent one customer with all their details

    c.Columns (also called fields or attributes) define the properties or characteristics of the entity stored in the table. 
    Each column has a unique name and a data type (e.g., integer, text, date) that specifies the kind of data it holds. For example, columns in a "Customers" table might be Name, Address, and Phone Number

Summary:
Table: A structured set of data about one type of entity.

Row: A single record representing one instance of that entity.

Column: A named attribute describing a property of the entity, with a defined data type.

4. What is a primary key and a foreign key?
    a. A primary key is a column or set of columns in a database table that uniquely identifies each row in that table. 
    It must contain unique values and cannot have nulls, ensuring every record is distinct and easily retrievable within the table

    b.A foreign key is a column or set of columns in one table that refers to the primary key in another table. 
    It creates a link between the two tables, enforcing referential integrity by ensuring that the foreign key values correspond to 
    existing primary key values in the referenced table. Unlike primary keys, foreign keys can have duplicate values and can accept 
    nulls if the relationship is optional

    Example:
    In a library database, the Books table might have BookID as its primary key. The Loans table would have a BookID foreign 
    key that references the Books table’s primary key, ensuring that every loan record corresponds to a valid book.
    This system maintains data integrity and allows relational databases to efficiently manage interconnected data.
    
    Aspect	                Primary Key	                                        Foreign Key
    Purpose	                Uniquely identifies each record in its own table	Links records between two tables
    Uniqueness	            Must be unique	                                    Can have duplicate values
    Null values	            Not allowed	                                        Allowed (depending on relationship)
    Location	            Defined in the table it uniquely identifies	        Defined in a different table referencing a primary key
    Relationship	        Defines the "parent" table	                        Defines the "child" table
    Referential Integrity	Ensures uniqueness within the table             	Enforces consistency between related tables

5. What are CRUD operations? Can you explain each one?
    CRUD operations are the four fundamental actions used to manage data in persistent storage systems like databases. CRUD stands for Create, Read, Update, and Delete. 
    These operations are essential for any application that stores and manipulates data

    a.Create: This operation adds new data or records to the database. For example, when a new user registers on a website, 
      their information is "created" as a new record in the user table. In SQL, this is typically done with the INSERT statement
    
    b. Read: The read operation retrieves or views data from the database without modifying it. This could involve searching, listing, 
       or displaying existing records. In SQL, the SELECT statement is used to read data
    
    c. Update: Update modifies existing data or records in the database. For example, if a user changes their email address, 
       the corresponding record is updated with the new value. In SQL, this is performed with the UPDATE statement
    
    d. Delete: This operation removes data or records from the database. For instance, if a user deletes their account, 
       the corresponding record is deleted. In SQL, the DELETE statement is used

    CRUD operations are the building blocks of data management in applications, ensuring data can be added, accessed, changed, and removed as needed


🧩 SQL Querying & Operations
1. Write a SQL query to fetch all users who registered in the last 30 days.
    SELECT * | user_name, name //waiting specific columns 
    FROM users
    WHERE created_at >= NOW() - INTERVAL 30 DAY;

2.  How do you insert a new record into a table?
    INSERT INTO table_name (column1, column2, column3, ...)
    VALUES (value1, value2, value3, ...);
    
    INSERT INTO users (id, name, email)
    VALUES (1, 'Alice Smith', 'alice@example.com');

3. What does the JOIN clause do? Name and explain different types of joins.
    A JOIN clause in SQL is used to combine rows from two or more tables based on a related column between them, 
    allowing you to retrieve related data stored across multiple tables in a single query result

    Different Types of SQL JOINs
    a. INNER JOIN
        Returns only the rows that have matching values in both tables. If there is no match, the row is excluded from the result.
        Example: Retrieve orders with their corresponding customers where the customer_id matches.
        SELECT *
        FROM orders
        INNER JOIN customers ON orders.customer_id = customer.id

    b.  LEFT JOIN (or LEFT OUTER JOIN)
        Returns all rows from the left table and the matching rows from the right table. If there is no match, columns from the right table will contain NULL.
        Use case: Get all employees and their departments, including employees without a department.
    
    c. RIGHT JOIN (or RIGHT OUTER JOIN)
        Returns all rows from the right table and the matching rows from the left table. If there is no match, columns from the left table will contain NULL.
        Use case: Get all departments and their employees, including departments without employees.

    d. FULL JOIN (or FULL OUTER JOIN)
        Returns all rows when there is a match in one of the tables. Rows without a match in either table will have NULL in the columns of the other table.
        Use case: Combine all records from two tables, showing matches and unmatched rows

    e. CROSS JOIN
        Returns the Cartesian product of the two tables, i.e., every possible combination of rows from both tables. It does not require a matching column.
        Use case: Generate combinations of all products and all stores.

        Why Use JOINs?
        To retrieve related data distributed across normalized tables

        To establish relationships between tables using keys

        To combine and analyze data from multiple sources efficiently

        To maintain data integrity while avoiding redundancy

4. What is the difference between WHERE and HAVING
    The WHERE and HAVING clauses in SQL both filter data but differ in when and how they apply the filtering:

    Explanation
    WHERE filters rows before any grouping or aggregation happens. It works on raw data and cannot include aggregate functions.

    HAVING filters the results after rows have been grouped and aggregated, typically used with GROUP BY to filter groups based on 
    aggregate values.

    Using WHERE:
    -- Get employees with salary greater than 50000
    SELECT * 
    FROM employees
    WHERE salary > 50000;

    Using HAVING:
    -- Get departments where average salary is greater than 50000
    SELECT department, AVG(salary) AS avg_salary
    FROM employees
    GROUP BY department
    HAVING AVG(salary) > 50000;

5. What is a subquery and when would you use one?
    A subquery (also called a nested or inner query) is a SQL query embedded inside another SQL query. It is enclosed in 
    parentheses and executed first, with its result used by the outer query for further filtering, comparison, or calculation

    When to Use a Subquery
    To break complex queries into simpler, manageable parts.

    To filter results based on aggregated or computed values.

    To perform operations that require multiple steps, such as finding records related to results from another query.

    To dynamically compute values used in the outer query.

    To replace or complement joins in some scenarios (though joins are often more efficient).

    Examples
    1. Subquery in WHERE clause
    Find customers who have placed orders:
    SELECT customer_id, first_name
    FROM Customers
    WHERE customer_id IN (
    SELECT customer_id
    FROM Orders
    );


🔄 Data Manipulation & Transactions
1. What is a database transaction? Why is it important?
    A database transaction is a logical unit of work consisting of one or more operations (such as insert, update, delete) executed 
    as a single, indivisible sequence within a database management system (DBMS)

    Example
    In a banking system, transferring money from one account to another involves two operations: deducting from one account and adding 
    to another. A transaction ensures both happen together; if either fails, the entire transfer is rolled back, preserving data integrity

    In summary:
    A database transaction is essential for ensuring reliable, consistent, and secure data operations, especially in multi-user environments 
    where concurrent access and system failures are common.

2. What do the ACID properties stand for?
    The ACID properties in a database transaction stand for:

    a.Atomicity: Ensures that a transaction is treated as a single, indivisible unit of work. Either all operations within the transaction 
    complete successfully, or none do. If any part fails, the entire transaction is rolled back, preventing partial updates and keeping 
    the database consistent.

    b.Consistency: Guarantees that a transaction brings the database from one valid state to another, adhering to all predefined rules, 
    constraints, and data integrity checks. This prevents corruption or invalid data from entering the system.

    c.Isolation: Ensures that concurrent transactions do not interfere with each other. Each transaction operates as if it were the only one 
    running, so intermediate states are not visible to others, preventing conflicts and ensuring correctness in multi-user environments.

    d.Durability: Once a transaction is committed, its changes are permanently saved to the database, surviving system crashes or failures. 
    This is typically achieved through mechanisms like write-ahead logging or persistent storage.

    Together, these properties ensure that database transactions are reliable, consistent, and safe even in the presence of errors, 
    crashes, or concurrent access

3. How do you ensure data integrity in a database?
    To ensure data integrity in a database, organizations implement a combination of technical controls, best practices, and policies that 
    maintain the accuracy, consistency, and reliability of data throughout its lifecycle. Key approaches include:

    1. Data Validation and Verification
        Enforce data validation rules at the point of entry to ensure data conforms to expected formats, types, and ranges 
        (e.g., using database constraints, application-level checks).

        Verify data accuracy by cross-referencing with trusted sources or using checksums to detect corruption.

    2. Use of Database Constraints
        Define primary keys to uniquely identify records and prevent duplicates.

        Use foreign key constraints to maintain referential integrity between related tables.

        Apply check constraints to enforce domain-specific rules on data values.
    
    3. Access Control and Authentication
        Restrict data access to authorized users through role-based access control (RBAC) and strong authentication mechanisms, 
        limiting the risk of unauthorized data modification.

    4. Data Encryption
        Encrypt sensitive data both at rest and in transit to protect against unauthorized access or tampering.

    5. Regular Backups and Recovery Plans
        Perform frequent backups to enable restoration of data in case of corruption, loss, or disaster.

        Maintain and test recovery plans to ensure data can be restored to a consistent state quickly.
    
    6. Audit Trails and Logging
        Implement detailed logging of data changes and access events to monitor for unauthorized or erroneous modifications and 
        support forensic analysis.
    
    7. Data Quality Checks and Cleansing
        Regularly audit data for errors, inconsistencies, duplicates, and completeness.

        Cleanse and transform data to maintain uniform formats and remove inaccuracies.

    8. Data Governance and Policies
        Establish clear policies defining data ownership, quality standards, and management procedures to ensure consistent handling of
        data across the organization.

5. What is the difference between DELETE, TRUNCATE, and DROP
   Summary:

    Use DELETE to remove specific records with conditions and when you need transactional control.

    Use TRUNCATE to quickly remove all data but keep the table structure intact.

    Use DROP to permanently delete the entire table and its data.

    -- Delete specific rows
        DELETE FROM employees WHERE department = 'Finance';

        -- Remove all rows but keep table
        TRUNCATE TABLE employees;

        -- Remove entire table and its data
        DROP TABLE employees;

    Additional Details:
        DELETE is a DML (Data Manipulation Language) command; it deletes rows one by one and supports conditions via WHERE. 
        It can be rolled back if used inside a transaction.

        TRUNCATE is a DDL (Data Definition Language) command; it removes all rows by deallocating data pages, making it faster 
        than DELETE. It does not log individual row deletions and generally cannot be rolled back.

        DROP is a DDL command that removes the entire table including its structure, indexes, constraints, and permissions. 
        Once dropped, the table cannot be recovered unless restored from backup.






